📘 Java Notes — Topic 1: Introduction to Java

Great plan! Learning topic-by-topic with this format will make revision very easy later. I'll follow the correct learning order, and I'll always mention prerequisites so nothing feels disconnected.

Let's start from the very beginning.

1️⃣ Definition

Java is a high-level, object-oriented programming language that is:

Platform-independent (write once, run anywhere)
Compiled + Interpreted — your code is first compiled into an intermediate form called bytecode, and then that bytecode is run by the JVM (Java Virtual Machine).

Prerequisite: None. This is your starting point. 🎉

2️⃣ Why It Is Used
Used to build desktop apps, web apps, Android apps, enterprise systems, backend servers.
Platform independence means the same compiled code runs on Windows, Linux, or Mac without changes.
Object-Oriented — makes large programs organized, reusable, and easier to maintain.
Strongly typed and has automatic memory management (Garbage Collection) — you don't manually free memory like in C/C++.

3️⃣ Syntax (Basic Program Structure)

Every Java program needs at least one class, and execution starts from the main method.

java

public class ClassName {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // your code goes here
    }
}

Key rule: If the class is public, the file name must match the class name exactly (including capitalization).
Example: class HelloWorld → file must be named HelloWorld.java

4️⃣ Example
java
public class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}

🔎 Line-by-line explanation:

Line	Explanation
public class HelloWorld	Declares a class named HelloWorld. public means it's accessible from anywhere.
{	Start of the class body.
public static void main(String[] args)	The main method — entry point of every Java program. JVM looks for this exact signature to start running the code.
static	Means this method belongs to the class itself, not to an object — so JVM can call it without creating an object first.
void	Means this method doesn't return any value.
String[] args	Allows you to pass command-line arguments (an array of text values) when running the program.
System.out.println("Hello, World!");	Prints the text to the console, and moves to a new line after.
} }	Closing braces for method and class.

🎯 Output Prediction:
Hello, World!

5️⃣ Real-Time Example

Think of Java like a universal recipe book:

You write the recipe (source code) once.
The recipe is translated into a standard instruction format (bytecode).
Any kitchen (Windows/Linux/Mac) with the right "chef" (JVM) can read and cook the same recipe — no rewriting needed.

Real apps built with Java: Android apps, banking software, e-commerce backends (like large-scale order processing systems), enterprise tools.

6️⃣ Important Points to Remember
Java file extension: .java
Compiled file extension: .class (bytecode)
Java is case-sensitive → Main ≠ main
Every statement ends with a semicolon ;
Code blocks are wrapped in curly braces { }
main method signature must be exactly: public static void main(String[] args)

7️⃣ Common Mistakes (Beginners)

❌ Forgetting semicolon ; at the end of a statement
❌ File name not matching the public class name
❌ Writing Main instead of main (Java is case-sensitive)
❌ Forgetting String[] args in the main method signature
❌ Using System.out.Println instead of System.out.println (wrong capitalization)

8️⃣ Short Summary

Java is a platform-independent, object-oriented language. Every program has a class and a main method, which is where execution starts. Code is compiled to bytecode and run by the JVM, allowing it to run on any operating system.

9️⃣ Practice Questions

What is the difference between source code and bytecode in Java?
Why must the public class name match the file name?
What will happen if you remove static from the main method? (Think about it — we'll confirm the answer when we cover methods.)
Write a Java program to print your name and your favorite hobby on two separate lines.
What does System.out.println() do, and how is it different from System.out.print()?

🔧 Extra Add-ons
🟢 Simple explanation:

Java code → compiled into bytecode → JVM runs that bytecode on any machine.

🔵 Slightly advanced explanation:

JDK, JRE, and JVM work together like this:

Component	Full Form	Role
JDK	Java Development Kit	Used to write and compile code. Includes compiler (javac) + JRE.
JRE	Java Runtime Environment	Used to run Java programs. Includes JVM + libraries.
JVM	Java Virtual Machine	Actually executes the bytecode. Makes Java platform-independent.

📌 Relationship: JDK ⊃ JRE ⊃ JVM (JDK contains JRE, JRE contains JVM)

💼 Interview Perspective:
"What is platform independence in Java, and how is it achieved?" → Answer using bytecode + JVM concept.
"Difference between JDK, JRE, and JVM?" → Very commonly asked — use the table above.

📘 Java Notes — Topic 2: Variables and Data Types

Prerequisite: Topic 1 (Introduction to Java) — you should know the basic program structure and where the main method goes, because that's exactly where we'll write our variables.

1️⃣ Definition
A variable is a named container in memory that stores a value which can change during program execution.
A data type tells Java what kind of value the variable will hold (number, text, true/false, etc.) and how much memory to reserve for it.
2️⃣ Why It Is Used
Programs need to store and reuse data — like a user's age, name, price of an item, etc.
Data types help Java:
Allocate the correct amount of memory
Prevent invalid operations (e.g., you can't accidentally add text to a number without conversion)
Catch errors at compile time rather than while the program is running
3️⃣ Syntax
java
dataType variableName = value;

Examples of declaration:

java
int age;              // declaration only
age = 25;              // assignment
int marks = 90;        // declaration + assignment (initialization)
4️⃣ Example
java
public class VariableDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int age = 20;
        double price = 99.99;
        char grade = 'A';
        boolean isPassed = true;
        String name = "Rahul";

        System.out.println("Name: " + name);
        System.out.println("Age: " + age);
        System.out.println("Price: " + price);
        System.out.println("Grade: " + grade);
        System.out.println("Passed: " + isPassed);
    }
}
🔎 Line-by-line explanation:
Line	Explanation
int age = 20;	Declares an integer variable age and stores whole number 20.
double price = 99.99;	Declares a decimal (floating-point) variable to store money/price values.
char grade = 'A';	Declares a single character — note single quotes for char.
boolean isPassed = true;	Stores only true or false.
String name = "Rahul";	Stores text — note double quotes for String. (String is technically a class, not a primitive — more on that later.)
"Name: " + name	The + here joins (concatenates) text and variable value into one printable line.
🎯 Output Prediction:
Name: Rahul
Age: 20
Price: 99.99
Grade: A
Passed: true
5️⃣ Real-Time Example

Think of variables like labeled boxes:

Box Label (Variable)	Box Type (Data Type)	What's Inside
age	int	20
price	double	99.99
isPassed	boolean	true

Real-world use: In a shopping app, productPrice (double), quantity (int), isInStock (boolean), and productName (String) are all variables holding different types of data about one product.

🧮 Java's 8 Primitive Data Types (Table)
Data Type	Size	Stores	Example
byte	1 byte	Small whole numbers (-128 to 127)	byte b = 100;
short	2 bytes	Bigger whole numbers	short s = 5000;
int	4 bytes	Standard whole numbers	int a = 100000;
long	8 bytes	Very large whole numbers	long l = 15000000000L;
float	4 bytes	Decimal numbers (less precision)	float f = 5.75f;
double	8 bytes	Decimal numbers (more precision)	double d = 19.99;
char	2 bytes	Single character	char c = 'X';
boolean	1 bit (JVM-dependent)	true / false	boolean flag = false;

📌 String is not a primitive type — it's a class (object) in Java. We'll cover it in detail separately, but you'll use it a lot from now on.

6️⃣ Important Points to Remember
Variable names are case-sensitive: age ≠ Age
Variable names cannot start with a number and cannot contain spaces
long values need an L suffix, float values need an f suffix
char uses single quotes 'A', String uses double quotes "A"
Java is statically typed — once you declare a type, you can't store a different type in it later
Naming convention: use camelCase for variables → studentName, totalMarks
7️⃣ Common Mistakes (Beginners)

❌ Using double quotes for char → char c = "A"; (wrong — causes error)
❌ Forgetting f suffix for float → float f = 5.75; (this is actually a double by default, causes error when assigned to float)
❌ Forgetting L suffix for large long values
❌ Declaring a variable but never initializing it, then trying to use it (Java won't allow using uninitialized local variables)
❌ Mixing data types incorrectly, e.g., int x = 5.5; (decimal into int — not allowed without explicit conversion)
❌ Starting variable names with numbers: int 1value = 5; (invalid)

8️⃣ Short Summary

A variable is a named memory location to store data, and its data type defines what kind of value it can hold and how much memory it uses. Java has 8 primitive data types (byte, short, int, long, float, double, char, boolean) plus reference types like String. Java is statically typed, so type mismatches are caught at compile time.

9️⃣ Practice Questions
Declare a variable to store your height in centimeters using the most appropriate data type.
What will happen if you write: int marks = "90";? Why?
Write a program that stores your name, age, and whether you are a student (true/false), then prints all of them.
What's the difference between float and double? Which one is more precise?
Predict the output:
java
   int x = 10;
   double y = 5.5;
   System.out.println(x + y);

(Hint: think about type promotion.)

🔧 Extra Add-ons
🟢 Simple explanation:

A variable is a box, the data type tells you what can go inside the box (numbers, text, true/false).

🔵 Slightly advanced explanation:

Java performs implicit type promotion in expressions — when int and double are used together (like x + y above), the int is automatically converted to double before the operation. This is called widening conversion, and it happens automatically without data loss. The reverse (double → int) requires explicit casting and can lose data.

java
double result = x + y;   // int x is auto-promoted to double
int z = (int) y;          // explicit cast — decimal part is lost (narrowing)
🔄 Comparison with Previous Topic (Topic 1 → Topic 2)
Topic 1: Program Structure	Topic 2: Variables
Told JVM where to start (main method)	Tells JVM what data to work with
Structural — class, method	Data-focused — values, memory
No data was stored	Now we store real data (numbers, text)
💼 Interview Perspective:
"Is Java pass-by-value or pass-by-reference?" (relates to how variables are stored/passed — we'll revisit this deeply in Methods)
"Difference between float and double?" — precision and default type of decimal literals
"Why is String not a primitive type?" — good follow-up question once you learn about Strings/Objects